[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> 34-year-old teacher Mary
Kay Letourneau was nabbed
in a torrid affair with
a 12-year-old student.
>> Actor Hugh Grant,
arrested in Los Angeles.
>> Televangelist Jim Baker
was convicted on all fraud
and conspiracy counts.
>> Pop star Michael Jackson--
>> Russell Crowe
arrested for throwing--
>> Spears' ongoing scandal
over her children, drug use,
and other tabloid matters is
raising questions about her--
>> Mel Gibson's arrest for
driving under the influence was
followed by an abusive
verbal outburst.
--made fun of Irish,
Jews, Italians,
and other ethnicities.
>> Governor Eliot Spitzer of New
York apologized to his family--
>> Pee Wee Herman charged
with indecent exposure.
>> --prostitution ring.
>> Televangelist Jim
Baker was convicted--
>> All of the drugs in
in the victims' body,
which were discovered in
nearby prescription bottles,
were legally obtained
from two physicians.
>> It's really bizarre to me
when someone does something
so stupid.
I don't get it.
>> 25 years ago, I woke
up on a cold marble floor,
and I had passed
out after a night--
I should say another night--
of drugs.
But something had
shifted, and I knew
that if I didn't make a
dramatic change in my life
that I was going to die.
And I called my
mother, and I said,
I need to go back
into treatment.
And I'd already been in
treatment three or four times.
All these other times, I left.
On day 10, I started
to feel great.
I'm drug-free.
I'm not like any
of these people.
I'm out of here.
And I would pack
up my little bag,
put my little arrogant suit
on, and march myself out
of treatment, and I was free.
I was going to make
it to the other side.
By day 6 or 7, I'd be on the
phone, looking for my drugs,
and end up right back in rehab.
So instead of running away this
time, I went into the bathroom,
and I got down on
my hands and knees.
And I started begging, please
relieve me of this pain.
Grant me the serenity to accept
the things I cannot change.
I cannot change my
desire to leave.
And in that moment,
on that floor,
something happened to me.
Something that was like magic.
It was mind-blowing to me.
Because all of the sudden,
after a few minutes,
I knew I could
stay one more day.
How could I go from
terrified and my mind going
a million miles a minute to
this place of complete peace?
I walked out of there
on day 28, knowing
that there was something
that I had to find out about.
>> The shadow is dark.
It's secretive.
It can be dangerous.
>> The shadow is everything
that we don't want other people
to see.
>> Things we hide,
things that we lie about.
Not only to us,
but to ourselves.
>> And they are the sort
of monsters that come out
of the caves in the
middle of the night.
>> It is that dark, intrinsic
side of us that each and every
one of us tries to hide.
>> Because we've been told from
such an early age that these
are not acceptable
components of who we are.
>> To have one
aspect of the soul,
you have to experience the
other aspect of the soul
to counterbalance it.
>> "Hello darkness,
my old friend.
I've come to talk to you again."
They we're talking
about the shadow.
>> The only time you don't have
a shadow is if you're standing
in the darkness.
>> The shadow shows
up in so many ways.
Writing bad checks,
drinking too much,
cheating on our tax
returns, dipping
into our expense account
or the family trust,
eating chocolate cake in
the middle of the night
after three days of dieting,
and depriving ourselves.
Screaming at our kids or
verbally abusing our partners
after being the nice guy at work
all day, surfing the internet
and visiting porn sites while
our wife makes us dinner.
Cheating on our husband
while he is hard at work,
trying to provide all
the extra pleasures
in life for our family.
Stealing our coworkers' ideas
and claiming them as our own.
The shadow is made up of
the thoughts, emotions,
and impulses that we find
too painful, embarrassing,
or distasteful to accept.
So instead of dealing with
them, we repress them.
Right now, hundreds
of millions of people
are living in denial of
their individual shadow,
and all of us are being affected
by the collective shadow
in more ways than
we can imagine.
>> The collective shadow
manifests as evil, as war,
as terrorism, as
social injustice,
as radical inequities
in our economic status.
You know, right now, we
have 50% of the world living
on less than $2 a day,
20% of the world living
on less than $1 a day.
We are totally in
denial of the fact
that this is also
a manifestation
of our collective shadow.
Why?
Because people in
social institutions
and financial institutions,
political institutions,
corporate institutions
are in total denial
of the shadow energy.
They don't even understand it.
Oh, you mean what we
call evil in the world
is the manifestation of our
collective shadow, turned
pathological.
Repressed, in rage, in denial.
People who express
self-righteous morality
are usually the ones who have
the darkest, deepest shadows.
The shadow of the
Catholic church,
which pronounces on
homosexuality as evil and calls
gays sinners while hiding
pedophiles in its own clergy.
These are all expressions
of the shadow.
>> The entire trajectory of
human history at this point is
like the "Titanic."
It is headed for an iceberg.
It is going in a direction
that is unsustainable,
and it is going in
a direction that
is unsurvivable if
not for us, then
at least for our children
or our grandchildren.
And from an archetypal
perspective,
each and every one
of us is the captain.
And the temptation
is, it's too painful.
The temptation is to
just distract ourselves.
pretend it's not happening,
or the temptation is
to go into cynicism,
to just go into anger
and indulge that
and not do anything.
And each and every one of us
are challenged at this point.
Don't be the captain who
just goes downstairs and goes
to sleep.
>> Everything that expands
has got to contract.
What goes up's got to come down.
People are going to be
confronted with their shadow
all of the sudden.
Have been living high,
living wonderful,
everything's been
exorbitantly exuding.
And now suddenly, there's going
to be a contractive phase.
And if you haven't
met yourself, if you
haven't done your self work, if
you haven't been on the inside
and done some exploration
and cleaned up--
you know, cleaned your
house and detoxed it,
you're going to be in trouble.
>> The birth of our shadow
occurs when we are very young,
before our logical thinking mind
has developed enough to filter
the messages we receive
from parents, caregivers,
and the world at large.
Even if we had the
best of parents,
we inevitably got shamed for
displaying certain qualities
and received the message
that something about us
was not OK, that something
was wrong with us,
or that we were bad.
>> You greedy little toot.
How are you going to eat
all those before dinner?
>> These messages getting
ingrained in our subconscious
like a computer virus, altering
our perception of ourselves,
and wounding our
healthy sense of ego.
When we suppress any
of these qualities,
we are living in denial
of all of who we are.
>> And of course, it's different
based upon our environment.
If you're raised in a family
of blue collar workers
and you declare that you
want to play the piano
or you want to become an
artist, that artistic quality
will be negatively
received, and you may end up
having to suppress that.
On the other hand,
if you're raised
in a family of artists
and intellectuals
and you declare that you want
to start working on construction
or you want to be
really athletic,
that may also be
perceived of as negative.
>> We try with all our might
to pretend that we are not that
which we hate.
In fact, proving this
is an all-important task
for the wounded ego, a
task which the ego believes
is vital to its existence.
The wounded ego must
hide all that we
believe is unacceptable
about ourselves.
To accomplish this task,
it constructs a mask
to prove to others that we are
not as defective, inferior,
worthless, and bad as
we might fear we are.
None of us likes to admit
that we have these flaws
and insecurities,
so to hide them,
we create a persona
at a very young age.
We start to wrap ourselves
up in a new package
that we believe will bring
us the love, attention,
and acceptance
that we hunger for.
We create personas so
that we can belong.
Most of us have a public
life and a secret life.
We work hard to feel
good about ourselves,
and a moment later,
we do something
to sabotage those good feelings.
We wear masks that we
believe will take us
where we want to go, and
these masks take many forms.
Which one do you wear?
Our masks become our prison.
Beneath the mask that
we show the world,
our wounded egos are in pain.
The parts of us that were
deemed bad and wrong by others
and now by ourselves
are literally
screaming to get
out, to be set free,
and to be accepted and loved as
a valuable part of who we are.
When we deny ourselves
a safe outlet
to express our dark
side, it builds up
and becomes a
powerful force that
is capable of
destroying our lives
as well as the lives of others.
This is what I call
the beach ball effect.
So everything that
we reject, we have
to keep beneath
our consciousness.
We try to bury it, so to speak.
You know how much
energy it takes
to put a beach ball underwater?
You take your selfish self,
you take your angry self,
you take your too good self,
your not good enough self,
you take all of it.
And it's like you have 40 beach
balls you're trying to manage.
And then what happens when
you're holding that beach ball
underwater?
When you're young, you've
got lots of energy,
so you can manage a
lot of beach balls.
But then when you're not in
the midst of possibility,
when your defenses are down,
when you have your attention
on some big prize you're going
to win, all of a sudden, boom!
Somebody does something.
What happens to the beach ball?
Pops up and it hits
you in the face.
What's road rage?
Is it anything more than
that each ball coming up?
We see it in the
media all the time.
A filmmaker is making
deep Christian films.
All of a sudden gets drunk,
shouts anti-Semitic comments
in a drunken rage, right?
A radio star makes his living
being a great communicator.
All of a sudden, makes a
comment, a racial slur.
So all of these beach balls
that you are trying to manage,
are you successful at it?
No.
It's all, but not anymore.
>> When you don't deal with the
shadow, that part comes out,
and it'll creep up.
It'll creep up in workplaces.
It can creep up
in relationships.
>> The more we try to suppress
those societally determined
undesirable qualities, the
more they find interesting,
often mischievous ways
to express themselves.
>> And it would be like locking
somebody in the basement who
wants to get out.
So they do things
down there to get
our attention until we
recognize them and let them out.
>> Because those aspects of
ourselves that we don't like
exit through a kind
of detox process.
It's got to come out in
order to be released.
>> One of my beach balls
happened in front of a room
full of people.
So I'm out of
treatment five years.
I've been floating
around, trying to become
the most perfect person.
How could I have people
want to be my friend?
How could I be a
little more spiritual?
I was on a quest,
and I thought I was
doing a really beautiful job.
And I went to another workshop.
We had to get up in
front of the room
and say what we were
committed to in the world.
And I thought I was
just being wonderful,
and everybody was looking at me
like, you're all looking at me.
And from the back of the
room this woman screams out,
you're a bitch!
And I thought,
well, I know that.
How does she know?
[LAUGHTER]
And I was horrified.
I was so humiliated.
It was the one word that I
didn't want to be called.
And she said to me,
tell me something good
about being a bitch.
And I said, there's
nothing good.
She goes, well, you're a bitch.
There's got to be something
good about being a bitch.
And all I could think of was all
the ways that that part of me
had hurt me.
And at the time,
I was a retailer.
And she said, do you ever
get damaged merchandise
delivered to your store?
And I said, all the time.
She said, is there ever a
time where they don't want
to take back the damaged goods?
And I said, yes.
And she said, well,
do you ever have
to get a little forceful
or a little bitchy?
And I said, oh my god, yes.
And I was remodeling
a house at the time.
She said, when you're
a couple of weeks late
and $20,000 over budget, does
it help to be a little bitchy?
Would it help you?
And all of a sudden, I
realized that when I finally
said to the contractor, you
need to finish my house,
he finished my house.
And this light went
on inside of me
that this part of me
that I had shamed,
that I had hated so much,
actually came bearing gifts.
She said, either
you're going to use it,
or it's going to use you.
And that was a
life-changing moment for me.
>> When we fully
understand the human soul,
we find that it's a place of
ambiguity, of contradiction,
of paradox.
All experience is a result of
contrast, light and shadow,
pleasure and pain, up and
down, backwards and forwards.
In order to have manifestation,
you need opposing energies.
You need your enemies
to be who you are.
The human soul is simultaneously
divine and diabolical,
sacred and profane,
a sinner and saint.
Eastern wisdom traditions,
we have a saying.
The sinner and saint are
merely exchanging notes.
So once you understand that,
then first thing you realize
is to have a shadow is normal.
If you had only truth,
goodness, harmony on your side
and the complete
absence of the other,
there would be no
creative impulse.
Let's say you're only the
evolutionary creative impulse
in the universe.
Then the universe would
rapidly burn itself
into the heat death
of absolute zero.
If, on the other
hand, you're only
the impulse of inertia or
destruction or entropy,
then the universe would rapidly
collapse into a big black hole
before you could
say Deepak Chopra.
>> We are the microcosm
of the macrocosm.
This means that every quality
that we can see in another
exists within us.
We possess every human
characteristic and emotion,
whether active or
dormant, whether
conscious or unconscious.
There is nothing we can see or
conceive of that we are not.
We are everything, that
which we consider good
and that which we consider bad.
How could we know courage
if we have never known fear?
How could we know happiness
if we never knew sadness?
How could we know the light
if we didn't know dark?
All of life is based
on the coexistence
of these pairs of opposites.
Our shadow is forever
hiding from itself.
Rather than confront
our own darkness,
we project these unwanted
qualities onto others.
When we are projecting
our shadow selves,
it sounds like this.
She's so self-centered.
He's so full of himself.
These people are idiots.
What a loser.
Afraid of our own unworthiness
and simultaneously afraid
of our own greatness,
we unconsciously
transfer these
qualities onto another
rather than owning
them ourselves.
Those we project on own pieces
of our unclaimed darkness
as well as pieces of
our unclaimed light.
Until we take back all that
we have projected away,
what we can't be
with won't let us be.
One of the most frequently
asked questions I get
is, how do you know
if you're projecting?
If it's your stuff or theirs?
I think it was best said
by revered philosopher
and psychologist Ken Wilber.
He says that if a person or
a thing in our environment
informs us, if we receive what
is happening as information,
a point of interest, we
probably aren't projecting.
On the other hand,
if it affects us--
we're pointing our fingers,
judging, if we're plugged in--
chances are that we are a
victim of our own projections.
Think of someone from your
own life who disgusts, annoys,
or repulses you, and think
of the qualities about them
that you most hate.
Now imagine this person
standing right in front of you.
And I want you to put your hand
out, point your finger at them,
and say, you're an idiot,
or you're are a know-it-all,
or you're selfish.
Now stop where you are.
Keep your finger
pointing at them,
and now notice that one finger
is pointing at them, and where
the other three
fingers pointing?
Back at you.
This is the phenomenon
of projection.
Instead of acknowledging
the qualities within us
that we dislike, we project
them onto someone else.
We project them onto our
mothers, our kids, our friends,
or even better, some
famous public figure
who we have never even met.
If I asked each of you what
you love about these people,
you would each have
a different response.
The people that you hate
also represent some aspect
of yourself that you don't own.
Notice what you
think and feel as you
look at each of these people.
Whatever we judge or
condemn in another
is ultimately a disowned or
rejected part of ourselves.
>> I was watching the events
of 9/11 on TV with a friend
of mine.
And after that, we were
driving down the street,
and turned to my friend and I
said, you know, from now on,
the Arabs are going
to be the new blacks.
They're going to get the
brunt of a lot of projections
that blacks have carried in
this culture for a long time.
Now a lot of times,
blacks react.
We react to those projections,
and we project back,
and that creates
a vicious cycle.
And the ego consciousness
just responds the way
it should, really, because
it's designed to respond
as a survival mechanism.
That's what the ego's all
about, to help us survive.
But it's mechanical.
It's reactive.
When an aggressive, negative
energy is directed at us,
the ego immediately wants
to defend and react.
Of course, when you
react to a projection,
you become that projection.
And I didn't want to
become an angry black man.
That doesn't mean that
I don't get angry.
I certainly can
and do get angry,
but I express it and let it go.
>> There's an old Sufi story
about a philosopher who made
an appointment to debate with
a Sufi wisdom teacher named
Nasrudin.
When the philosopher
arrived at his appointment,
he found Nasrudin
away from his home.
Infuriated, the philosopher
picked up a piece of chalk
and wrote stupid oaf
on Nasrudin's gate.
When Nasrudin got
home and saw this,
he rushed right over to
the philosopher's house.
I had forgotten that
you were to call,
and I'm sorry I missed
your appointment, he said.
But I remembered it the
minute I saw that you had
written your name on my gate.
The great Swiss
psychologist Carl Jung
who coined the word
shadow and shadow
work said that is the shadow,
the person we'd rather not be.
Rush Limbaugh
hated drug addicts,
and then it was revealed
that he was one himself.
Reverend Ted Haggard
railed against homosexuals,
and was later caught in a drug
and male prostitute scandal.
A powerful example
of projection at play
is that of the ex-governor
of New York, Eliot Spitzer.
As a public official,
Spitzer worked tirelessly
to rid the streets of
prostitution rings.
Ultimately, he wound
up getting busted
for having a
relationship with a call
girl, which ruined
his reputation
and his political future.
If we look at this through
the eyes of the shadow,
I would suggest that some
time long ago, probably
as a young man, he had the
impulse to sleep with a hooker.
Since this wasn't politically
or socially acceptable,
he buried this
impulse deep inside,
only to be brought down by
this very unconscious urge.
It's fascinating to
see that he tried
to destroy the temptation
in the outer world
because unconsciously, he knew
that the real danger lurked
in his inner world.
This is why we want to
deal with the shadow.
Rather than trying
to convince you
that you're not all
those negative things
and encouraging you to
think a good thought,
shadow work urges
you to get in there
and to be with what you
are resisting, because what
you resist will persist.
If you don't deal with your
shadow, it will deal with you.
>> The cost of ignoring a
destructive pattern is that
you're going to self-destruct.
You will implode
rather than explode.
>> You know, my training
is as a neurologist,
so I've spent well over
three decades studying how
the nervous system
organizes this information.
And it's really
quite interesting
when you look at the
fact that really,
even though we think of
having one brain, we actually
have three different brains.
We have this very
primitive brain,
which some people call
the reptilian brain.
And if you look at a reptile
or look at a crocodile,
it really just has two
responses, on or off.
So if you ever watched
a crocodile try and eat
a wildebeest, it seems
to be very quiet,
and suddenly explodes.
And then it goes back
into its quiet state.
So that response is really a
very basic survival response.
But the mammalian brain,
which is sometimes
known as the limbic brain, has
created a modulating effect
on that reptilian brain.
So the limbic system has
brought into this very primitive
on/off response
gradations, meaning
you can be a little bit on,
significantly on, really on.
But then on top of that
mammalian brain, really
just for the last
couple 100,000 years,
we've evolved this human brain,
which is called the neocortex,
neo meaning new cortex,
new covering of the brain.
And that actually allows
us, for the first time
in evolutionary history,
to decide whether or not
we want to react at all.
>> If we look at brain
scans, we can actually see
in a traumatized brain this part
of the brain kind of shutting
down, becoming dark.
The part of the brain that
is associated with emotions
is that part you might
be familiar with,
the fight or flight
or freeze response.
The amygdala, which
is the fear processing
center in this part of the
brain, really becomes bright.
So what happens is trauma
changes brain functioning,
and then that triggers changes
in stress hormones in the body,
which are not a good thing.
>> It's crucial to be able to
recognize and express any kind
of pain.
Without that, it stays with us.
It lodges in the body.
And it causes us to react,
to live unconsciously.
>> The unresolved issues that
people have in their bodies,
their emotions, has an absolute
direct correlation with
their physical bodies, their
health, and their well-being,
their expression of
wellness overall.
They think that their
health is somehow
separate from their emotions.
They are intimately connected.
>> Obesity, diabetes,
heart disease, and cancer.
They're all the
result significantly
of chronic, unprocessed,
inflammatory molecules
that have their correlates
in the psychologic world
of chronic, unprocessed
emotions and experiences.
>> Every single one of those
conditions is a byproduct
of our stress levels.
It affects our
health intimately.
Most people are aware
that what they eat
and what they drink affect
their toxicity levels.
What they don't realize
is that what they think
and the emotions that
they've built up over years
are really the most toxic.
>> The ways that people have
dealt with this traditionally
and historically are inadequate.
My patients are in overwhelm.
This is not new age mumbo jumbo.
This is actually hard science.
The science here now is
indisputable that thoughts,
that emotions affect
the organs of the body.
>> We have to be mindful with
every single thought that we
have every single day.
How do we want to create
our heaven or our hell?
How do we treat one another?
Because we are the source
of everything within us.
>> There is a poem by Rumi
called "The Guest House,"
which in many ways
describes the human journey.
>> "This being human
is a guest house.
Every morning, a new arrival.
A joy, a depression, a meanness,
some momentary awareness
comes as an unexpected visitor.
Welcome and entertain
them all, even
if they are a crowd of sorrows
who violently sweep your house
empty of its furniture.
Still treat each
guest honorably.
He may be clearing you
out for some new delight.
The dark thought, the
shade, the malice,
meet them at the door
laughing, and invite them in.
Be grateful for whoever
comes, because each has been
sent as a guide from beyond."
>> Repressing our anger may
seem like a good solution,
but pretty soon, we run
out of places to hide.
Divorce, stress at work,
financial trouble, or tension
within our families
provoke the shadow
until finally, it erupts.
The ancient Vedic text
known as the Bhagavad Gita
states that man should
discover his own reality,
not thwart himself, for he
has himself as his only friend
or as his only enemy.
But if he rejects
his own reality,
the self will war against him.
It's easy to love
yourself when you wake up
feeling strong and worthy,
and you have enough money
in the bank and you feel great.
But how do you love yourself
when you feel broke,
or when you've been
hurt or abused?
>> And that sets up the
conflict which, as we get older,
those wonderful forces that
we've locked up in our shadow
are rattling the cages.
And sometimes if we're
distracted, they sneak out
and we think and
the people around us
think, what were we thinking?
And the answer is,
we weren't thinking.
>> When we're pressed, the
shadow can look like this.
We have to resolve the
undigested emotions that
are buried in our bodies and
lodged as stress in our minds.
We have to unearth,
own, and embrace
the very parts of ourselves that
have caused us the most pain.
And the moment we do, the
light of our awareness
will begin the process
of transforming them.
We think we're alone.
We think we're different.
We feel isolated or abandoned.
And then when we
come together, we
find out that we all
go through traumas,
that to be human is
to be challenged,
and that everyone has
gone through some trauma.
And if we're courageous,
we see that there
is gold to be mined
in every experience.
>> It's very interesting,
because I don't remember
a single day where my mother
was not drunk, you know?
And I had to live through this.
And I didn't understand it.
Very, very confused by it all.
Why is this happening?
Who are you?
Because as she would drink and
as she became into that space,
I knew I didn't know her, and
I just wished she was dead.
I said, I wish you were dead.
I wish you were dead.
I wanted the pain out of
my life, out of my life.
Because you don't belong here.
Whoever you are, this
intoxicated person, and as
a child looking at this, because
my father wasn't there either,
I had to figure this out.
But all I did was
wish she was dead.
Well, not till 30, 40 years
later after she had passed
over-- she was many,
many years after that--
and after getting
involved in this work,
I realized that
that was indeed one
of the most incredible
blessings of my life.
I learned from that
situation about compassion,
and I learned about forgiveness.
And that's a pretty
big one, to have
to learn about forgiveness.
You know, we see these things
as horrific experiences,
terrible experiences,
dark experiences, when
in truth, they're really
enlightened experiences,
because they help
us to be who we are.
They help us to
be compassionate.
They help us to be forgiving.
They help us to look at
someone very, very differently.
>> What doesn't kill
us makes us stronger.
>> At a certain point in
life, it's about saying,
I have been through
what I've been through.
I've succeeded in
some ways, perhaps,
but I've also
failed in some ways.
I've been strong at times, but
I've also been weak at times.
I've gotten some things
right, and other things,
I've gotten wrong.
And some things have
gone well for me,
and some things have
been damn awful.
The issue is, what am I
going to do with all of that?
You know, two people
can go through
the exact same situation
on a external level,
but internally, they do two
completely different things
with it.
That's why we read
incredible stories
about people who went
through the Holocaust
or people who were
victims of genocide,
and yet they survived.
And yet, they go on to
live extraordinary lives.
And then you meet
other people who
went through a fraction of that
in terms of an internal trauma,
but they stay stuck
in it forever.
We begin to ask ourselves,
what am I getting
from staying stuck there?
What am I avoiding from
staying stuck there?
And what we are avoiding is
the greatest challenge of all,
and that is to be who we can
be in order to serve the world.
>> I asked a few people to
share their own shadow stories.
Some of them are complete,
others are ongoing.
All of them are portraits
of a fearless commitment
to transformation.
Swee is like that beautiful
combination of a miracle.
That part of her that she deems
so worthless and unlovable
actually comes bearing
the greatest gifts
and makes her the shining
light that she is today.
>> The pain that I've been
carrying throughout my life was
the pain of believing that I
was abandoned by my parents
because I wasn't pure enough.
I'm actually mixed in terms of
half-Japanese, half-Chinese.
I was considered mixed
and impure enough
to be raised in Japan.
You know, my parents
live in Japan,
and they left me with my
grandparents in Malaysia.
I just felt so
abandoned and rejected.
My father ended up getting
a divorce from my mother.
He remarried a Japanese
woman, but nobody ever
told me that when my father
came back with his wife
that she's not my mother.
I felt the immediate rejection
that they didn't want me
in their lives, and
that they would rather
have two dogs than
have me with them.
Because I have always discarded
my Japanese identity in
favor of my Malaysian
Chinese identity.
I felt like the country
has betrayed me,
and I used that pain to
really put it into my work.
I heard a project was
in trouble in Japan,
and I volunteered to go to
Japan to fix this problem,
because I know
that I could do it.
That one day I
stepped into Tokyo
and I just felt
that, this is where
I need to be to really
discover and explore
the Japanese half of me.
In less than three years,
I create a business
from $40 million to
over $200 million
in a country dominated by men.
You know, never heard of a
half-Japanese, half-Chinese
woman being a business leader
in a big US telecom world.
So I couldn't be the
leader I am today
without going
through the emotions,
and the pain that I went
through my whole life.
>> If we look deeper, we will
see that we all have a divine
recipe.
All of us have
shame about things
that have happened to us.
We've all gone through
difficult times.
We address these issues
so we can quiet our minds,
heal our bodies, and get
closer to our hearts' desires.
Hector had to let go
of his macho persona
to make peace with
the one that he loved
the most, which was his father.
>> My father was your
traditional Mexican man
in the sense of working
hard, wanting to get ahead,
wanting to provide
for his family.
And as a young boy, I
was looking for his love.
I wanted his attention.
The challenge was
trying to figure out
what was wrong with me.
Because obviously,
something's wrong with me
if, number one, he's not
giving me the attention
I want as a little boy,
not giving me the love.
Yelling at me, you know,
being verbally abusive.
Obviously, I did
something wrong.
There's something wrong with me.
So I carried that story from
that point on for a long time.
And I realized he
probably wasn't going
to do it the way I wanted.
He probably wasn't
going to tell me
what I wanted when
I was a little boy.
Mi te quiero, [SPANISH],,
I love you, son.
I did some personal growth work.
I went inside, looked at the
shame, the guilt, the pain.
I went through that.
I healed that.
And I was able to have that
forgiveness with my dad,
and let that go.
I wasn't going to tell
him I love you for him.
I was going to tell
him I love you for me.
My dad passed on, and I'm
really grateful that I listened
to that inner voice that said,
you know, go ahead and tell
your dad that you love him.
Do it for yourself.
>> Dr. Edie Eger is one
of the most beautiful,
divine women on
the planet today.
And she survived the
worst circumstances,
something that most of us
can't even ever imagine.
>> May 22, 1944.
When I arrived in
Auschwitz, there was chaos.
My father was separated from us.
And my sister and I
facing Dr. Mengele.
I didn't know who
he was until later.
And he pointed to my mom to
go to the left, and my sister
and I to the right.
I asked an inmate, when
will I see my mother?
And she pointed at the
chimney, and the fire
was coming out of the chimney.
And she said, you better
talk about your mother
in past tense.
She's burning there.
My sister and I held
each other and said,
the spirit never dies.
The spirit never dies.
I remember that so
vividly even today.
In Auschwitz, we
didn't know when
we took a shower whether water
is going to come out or gas.
And then there were others
who ran into the barbed wires.
They got electrocuted.
And that night, Dr. Mengele
came to the barracks
and wanted to be entertained.
And my friends knew that I
was a very talented gymnast,
and so they volunteered
me, and I ended up
dancing for Dr. Mengele.
I closed my eyes, and the
music was Tchaikovsky.
And I was dancing in Budapest
to "Romeo and Juliet."
I completely dissociated.
And we had choices.
I chose to look at the guards
that they were more in prison
than I was.
I remember they took my
blood about twice a week.
And I asked, why are
you taking my blood?
And the man said,
I'm taking your blood
to aid the German soldiers
so we can win the war.
I said to my myself,
I was a pacifist.
I was [INAUDIBLE].
I bet with my blood, you're
never going to win the war.
So I created the
part in me that I
was able to still
be in charge of,
and not allowing anything
that happened externally
to murder my spirit.
I remember I said,
if I survive today,
then tomorrow, I'll be free.
>> I remember when Marita
came to the shadow process,
and everybody was looking for
the negative qualities they
needed to embrace.
Marita couldn't even say
hers, and I kept asking,
what is so horrible that
you can't even say it?
And she said, because
of my background,
mine is that I'm a Nazi.
>> I was born in Germany in
1955, 10 years after the war.
I found out when I was 11 or
12 what my country had done.
This is a subject we
never talked about.
My grandfather wouldn't tell
me about his experience.
My mother wants nothing
to do with this.
I'm not the only German
that holds this and lives
this and hides this.
And I found many ways
to sabotage myself
from ever tasting
power or success,
because Hitler was successful
to come into power,
and that power was
horribly abused.
I didn't interact with
any Germans at all.
I stayed away from them.
And I did not want to interact
with any Jewish person,
because I didn't want
to cause any more pain,
and I was ashamed.
>> Samia was willing to
shine light on the darkness
and willing to take back her own
projections for the good of all
humanity.
>> In 2006, when Israel
bombed Lebanon, at the time,
I was trying to evacuate members
of my family and try to bring
them over to the US.
And there were no news.
You've got-- you
needed to figure out
how to reach to them.
I became so angry
again, because here
is my family in the bombing.
One day I was watching TV.
I saw girls crying,
little girls.
I saw they were Lebanese girls.
And of course, you
know, every time
I saw Lebanese kids being
bombed and everything,
I was really, really angry.
I was like, you
know, yes, yes, yes.
Let's bomb the
bastards kind of thing.
And at the end, I realized
they were reporting
from the Israeli border, on
the other side of the border,
and they looked exactly the
same as the Lebanese girls that
were killed on the other side of
the border, and I saw the pain.
And that day, that day I
made a commitment to myself
that I will no longer
tolerate that kind of cruelty,
irrespective of which side
of the border it's happening.
>> Now I'm not saying that if
you and I rise up to become
the people that we are capable
of being that we will rid this
planet of war in our lifetime.
But I believe with
all my heart, we
will achieve enough
this lifetime
that humanity will
go in that direction.
>> It's embracing
authentically who you are,
and not being ashamed of it.
There's nothing
to be ashamed of,
because everybody has a shadow.
If somebody doesn't, they
must be pathological.
>> When I'm leading
the shadow process,
it feels like my own journey
has come full circle.
>> I've been very
judgmental over the years.
I was having some really dark
dreams about you last night.
[LAUGHTER]
>> They're all true.
>> When we embrace our
totality, we experience freedom.
>> My heart feels
as big as my body.
It's no longer,
like, little anymore.
It's like, it's me.
>> And embrace it with love.
Love.
Because that's what we're here
for, to give and receive love.
>> Can't even believe
that you, Margaret.
I figured out who you were.
I-- I remember.
If I hadn't faced
my darkness, I never
would have found my light.
(WHISPERING) I can't
let my makeup run.
[LAUGHTER]
Our deepest fear is not
that we are inadequate.
Our deepest fear is that we
are powerful beyond measure.
It's our light, not our
darkness that most frightens us.
We ask ourselves, who am I to be
brilliant, gorgeous, talented,
and fabulous?
But actually, who
are you not to be?
You are a child of God.
Your playing small
doesn't serve the world.
There's nothing
enlightened about shrinking
so that other people won't
feel insecure around you.
We are all meant to
shine as children do.
We were born to make manifest
the glory of God that
is within us.
It's not just in some of us.
It's in everyone.
And as we let our
own light shine,
we unconsciously
give other people
permission to do the same.
As we are liberated
from our own fear,
our presence automatically
liberates others.
Consider the story
of the Golden Buddha.
In 1957, a monastery in
Thailand was being relocated,
and a group of monks
was put in charge
of moving a giant clay Buddha.
In the myths of the
move, one of the monks
noticed a crack in the Buddha.
Concerned about
damaging the idol,
the monks decided to wait
a day before continuing
with their task.
Later on, one of the monks came
to check on the giant statue.
He shined his flashlight
over the entire Buddha,
and when he reached
the crack, he
saw something
reflected back at him.
His curiosity aroused, the
monk got a hammer and a chisel
and began chipping away
at the clay Buddha.
As he knocked off piece
after piece of clay,
the Buddha got
brighter and brighter.
After hours of work, the
monk looked up in amazement
to see standing before him
a huge, solid gold Buddha.
Historians believe the Buddha
had been covered with clay
by Thai monks several hundred
years earlier before an attack
by the Burmese army.
They covered the
Buddha to protect it.
In the attack, all
the monks were killed,
so it wasn't until 1957 that the
great treasure was discovered.
Like the Buddha, our outer shell
protects us from the world.
Our real treasure
is hidden within.
We human beings unconsciously
hide our inner gold
under a layer of clay.
All we need to do
to uncover our gold
is to have the courage to chip
away at our outer shell, piece
by piece.
>> You can't fight
darkness with darkness,
but you can switch on the light.
>> All of the work we do on
the shadow is to get us to this
point where we can forgive.
To do forgiveness, we put
blindfolds on to make it safe
for people to share
their deepest secrets.
>> (WHISPERING)
I forgive myself.
>> I forgive myself for
not finishing college.
>> (WHISPERING) I
forgive myself--
>> --for beating up my sister.
>> (WHISPERING)
I forgive myself.
>> I forgive myself
for hating my body.
>> For screaming at my kids.
>> For not laughing enough.
>> Or for thinking that I'm a
stupid, incompetent asshole.
>> For stealing
from my first boss.
>> For being rich.
>> For being beautiful.
>> For drinking too much.
>> Not speaking out.
>> I forgive myself.
>> The light.
>> For cheating,
binging on my diet.
>> (WHISPERING)
I forgive myself.
>> (WHISPERING) I forgive
myself for everything.
>> (WHISPERING)
You are forgiven.
>> (WHISPERING) You are
completely forgiven.
>> I think a lot of people are
very afraid of their shadow.
They don't even want to
consider that they have one.
>> Brent is one of the
holiest men that I know,
he is so spiritually evolved
because he uses the pain of his
past to be the greatest
expression of himself today.
>> This story really began for
me when I was nine years old,
and I was attending a
summer camp that was managed
by an order of religious men.
During that summer,
I was molested
by one of the religious men.
I remember that experience being
a beginning of a split for me
from myself.
It happened a number
of other times
during that period of
time I was at that camp.
I was always afraid
that that guy
was going to come in in
the middle of the night.
I even went so far as to
borrow a knife from someone
that I kept under the pillow.
I was a nine-year-old kid.
I remember I just felt like some
part of me died at that time.
I went on with my life,
holding onto that secret,
holding onto that shame
of not really being
connected with myself anymore.
The difference between forgiving
and condoning, forgiving
is seeing the true
heart of another person.
It's beyond all the action.
In holding anybody to blame,
we limit our own love.
People need to know
that they can get help,
that they don't have to carry
their shame alone, that they
don't have to live in a secret.
And that there are people that
are holding the light for them,
that are willing to see them
as they are through the shadow.
It's the only way
to see yourself
is to look at the light and the
darkness, and to embrace it.
I use that analogy of being
like a drowning person where
someone's holding
your head underwater.
And at some point,
you realize that you
have to be the one that fights
your way back to the surface.
What happened to me as
a child has given me
a real depth of
compassion, which
I'm so grateful for,
because it's so clear to me
when I work with
people how they're
suffering, how they're hiding.
And it's been the
greatest gift of my life
that I'm in a
position where I can--
[SIGH]
--where I can honor
people in that way.
I'm just so grateful to be
able to connect with people
on that most vulnerable level,
that deepest level of the soul.
I regained my faith
because I asked for it.
>> Forgiveness doesn't happen
in your head until it happens
in your heart.
>> My mom was walking downtown
Beirut with the young Israelis.
And she turns to my
dad, and her mother
had been killed by the Israelis.
She goes, Mustafa, these
are young soldiers.
Don't they have a mother?
And if she can forgive,
who are we not to forgive?
>> Well, you can't move
on if you don't forgive.
The train stops if
you don't forgive.
And mostly, you've got
to forgive yourself
for taking whatever happened to
you too deep, to a deep place
that it shut you down.
>> The universe will deal
with that person's karma.
You don't have to worry
that if you quote, unquote,
"forgive" them that they're
going to somehow live
an undeserved, wonderful life.
>> Each and every one of
us needs to work full time
on self-forgiveness.
>> Our motivation to forgive
is increased when we understand
why it's so important.
It's not just to make
their day better.
It's to free you.
>> And forgiveness is the
hallway between the past
and the future.
>> The future expression
of who we are as a planet,
as our country and America
depends on the people that grow
up, that become the
next presidents,
that become the next
politicians, economists.
>> We want to make a difference.
We want to somehow get
it right, you know?
To feel like we
did or at least we
tried to do what
we came here to do.
That is the gold that
a being mined today.
>> But that's because
the world is growing.
We are entering a new age.
That's what's going on.
That's why we're
talking about this.
>> You are a force of love.
You are made from love.
And love is the most forceful
energy you could ever have.
Accept that energy.
Accept who you are.
Accept your inheritance,
if you will.
>> You're the total
being of love,
and don't waste a minute of it.
>> I've come full circle.
And this is the external of
what was going on inside of me.
>> It's how we are able to
perceive everything in life
as an opportunity for growth.
I got married.
I have three children
and five grandchildren,
and one great grandson.
And that's the best
revenge to Hitler.
[LAUGH]
[INAUDIBLE]
>> Yes.
>> So if you want authentic
peace of mind, creativity,
kindness, compassion, joy,
then you've got to understand
your shadow and be OK with it.
Celebrate it.
>> If shadows could talk,
they would tell us that
we're as precious as a
million pounds of gold,
that our brightest light can
shine only when we've accepted
our darkness, that there
is wisdom in every wound,
that there is a greater
future waiting for us,
that we are children of God
and have a right to be here,
that we were all created equal,
that our pain is not personal,
but belongs to every
man and woman alive.
And life is a magical journey
of making peace with both
our humanity and divinity.
They would tell us that we
deserve better, that we matter,
that we are more than we
ever dreamed possible.
And that there's light
at the end of the tunnel,
that there is nobody in
the world quite like you.
What if you knew in
every cell of your body
that you were living a divine
plan, a plan so important,
so vital for the
evolution of humankind?
What if you knew
that everything that
was happening right now that
doesn't fit your ego ideals
is happening to support
you in stepping out
of the smallness of your darkest
thought into the brilliance
of your biggest dream?
If you take this
journey, I promise you
that you're going to
experience more love,
more happiness than
you've ever had before.
[MUSIC PLAYING]